<heading> Chancellor’s Professor of law Richard Hasen named CNN election law analyst </heading>
<sub_heading> Noted author and scholar to analyze all aspects of the November 2020 U.S. presidential election </sub_heading>
<date> August 31, 2020 </date>
<article> Irvine, Calif., Aug. 31, 2020 — Richard Hasen, Chancellor’s Professor of law and political science at the UCI School of Law, has been named an election law analyst by the Cable News Network. He is a nationally recognized election law and politics expert, and he will appear on various CNN newscasts and television shows and offer analysis in CNN online stories to discuss and analyze all aspects of the November 2020 U.S. presidential election through the end of the year, while continuing on faculty at UCI Law.
Earlier in the year, Hasen released his latest book Election Meltdown: Dirty Tricks, Distrust, and the Threat to American Democracy (Yale University Press), which uses stories to illustrate four reasons Americans show increasing mistrust in voting and American elections. In the book, he explains how we got here and offers bipartisan solutions to repair the heart of American democracy.
In addition, Hasen led an ad hoc committee made up of a diverse group of leading scholars and thinkers to tackle this issue from an interdisciplinary perspective. In April, they released a report with 14 election recommendations in the areas of law, media, politics and tech titled: Fair Elections During a Crisis:  Urgent Recommendations in Law, Media, Politics, and Tech to Advance the Legitimacy of, and the Public’s Confidence in, the November 2020 U.S. Elections.
More about Rick Hasen
Richard L. Hasen has co-authored leading casebooks in election law and remedies. In 2013, he was named one of the 100 most influential lawyers in America by the National Law Journal, and his previous books include Voting Wars, Plutocrats United and The Justice of Contradictions. His op-eds and commentaries have appeared in many publications, including The New York Times, The Washington Post, Politico and Slate. Hasen also writes for the often-quoted Election Law Blog. He has appeared on numerous newscasts and television shows, as well as podcasts.
Professor Hasen holds a bachelor’s degree (with highest honors) from UC Berkeley, and a J.D., M.A., and Ph.D. (political science) from UCLA. After law school, Hasen clerked for the Honorable David R. Thompson of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, and then worked as a civil appellate lawyer at the Encino firm Horvitz and Levy.
About the UCI School of Law
The UCI School of Law is a visionary law school that provides an innovative and comprehensive curriculum, prioritizes public service, and demonstrates a commitment to diversity within the legal profession. UCI Law students have completed more than 100,000 hours of pro bono work in the past decade. Forty-eight percent of UCI Law’s graduates are students of color. At UCI Law, we are driven to improve our local, national and global communities by grappling with important issues as scholars, as practitioners, and as teachers who are preparing the next generation of leaders. The collaborative and interdisciplinary community at UCI Law includes extraordinary students, world-renowned faculty, dedicated staff, engaged alumni and enthusiastic supporters. More information on UCI Law is available here. Please follow us on Twitter and Instagram @ucilaw. </article>
