<heading> Measles Update: Message from Dr. Albert Chang </heading>
<sub_heading> N/A </sub_heading>
<date> May 4, 2019 </date>
<article> Dear UCI Community:
Since learning of a confirmed case of measles within our graduate student community last evening, we have been working diligently to determine and reach out to those who may have been exposed to the virus. Please see the Chancellor’s message issued this morning for details regarding this matter, including affected areas and timing.
Currently we have identified approximately 500 students and a few faculty who may have been exposed to the affected student and have a non-confirmed immunization status. These individuals may have been vaccinated or immune, but we don’t have verification in our student health portal. We have contacted all of them via email and asked them to respond as soon as possible with immunization verification. Lab work to confirm immunity may be requested of those who cannot verify their status. Medical colleagues at the Orange County Health Care Agency informed us that a quarantine of our on-campus residents is not necessary.
At this time, we see no reason to disrupt classes or schedules, so normal operations will be in place on Monday. We urge those who were in the affected areas, as outlined in Chancellor Gillman’s message, to determine their immunity status through immunization records or a medical provider. Students may visit the Student Health Center or the extended Anthem network, while faculty and staff should consult with their medical providers.
Those experiencing measles symptoms should seek medical attention immediately. Students are encouraged to call the Student Health Center before visiting so the clinical team can provide advice and prepare for the visit. Faculty and staff who were in the identified areas of exposure at the times indicated and are now experiencing symptoms should contact our occupational health partner, Newport Urgent Care, at (949) 752-6300. Faculty and staff with additional questions and concerns should contact the Workers’ Compensation and Disability Management office in Human Resources at wcdm@uci.edu.
We will continue to work through the weekend to ensure the safety and health of our campus community. We plan to send an update within the next 24 hours so you have the information you need to start the work week.
Sincerely,
Albert Chang, MD, MPH
Medical Director, UCI Student Health Center </article>
