<heading> Registration opens for third annual UCI Anti-Cancer Challenge </heading>
<sub_heading> Ride, run and walk event to benefit cancer research returns to Irvine campus June 8
 </sub_heading>
<date> April 11, 2019 </date>
<article> Orange, Calif., April 11, 2019 — The UCI Anti-Cancer Challenge is coming home to the University of California, Irvine campus on Saturday, June 8. Registration is now open for this third annual ride, run and walk to benefit cancer research at the UCI Health Chao Family Comprehensive Cancer Center.
“We’re grateful to the Orange County community for embracing the Anti-Cancer Challenge, raising more than $1 million for cancer research in the early years of the event,” said Dr. Richard Van Etten, director of the Chao Family Comprehensive Cancer Center. “Given the interest we’ve seen to date, we expect the event to break records in 2019. With every participant dollar raised going directly to lifesaving cancer research, each new person who rides, runs or walks brings us closer to achieving breakthroughs for patients.” 
The Anti-Cancer Challenge offers many ways to get involved, including 14-, 35-, 60- and 100-mile bicycle rides; 5- and 10K run/walks; and volunteer opportunities. Events will start and finish in Aldrich Park, at the center of the UCI campus. The 60- and 100-mile rides feature some of the nation’s most iconic beaches.
“This year, we’re excited to add a 10K, which offers runners and walkers a new way to support the innovative work of researchers at the Chao Family Comprehensive Cancer Center,” said Jennifer Sarrail, executive director of the Anti-Cancer Challenge. “The route will take people through the heart of the beautiful UCI campus, making it an enjoyable way to be part of a local movement to end cancer.”
Anti-Cancer Challenge sponsors include Monarch Beach Resort, Monster Energy, Hensel Phelps, Lynn Capouya Inc., the Kay Family Foundation, Hathaway Dinwiddie Construction Co., Montessori Schools of Irvine, tk1sc, DPR Construction, Pacific Ventures Management, Metagenics, Kitchell, FPL and Associates, Melissa’s Produce, Hologic and B. Braun Medical.
The Chao Family Comprehensive Cancer Center is at the forefront of discovering new ways to fight cancer. As the only National Cancer Institute-designated comprehensive cancer center in Orange County, it combines leading-edge research, pioneering clinical trials and world-class patient care. In 2018 alone, more than 5,600 new patients benefited from the advanced treatment provided by the center. For further information about the June event or to register, visit Anti-CancerChallenge.org.
About the UCI Anti-Cancer Challenge

5:30 a.m.-4 p.m.
Saturday, June 8, 2019
Aldrich Park, UCI campus, Irvine
Complimentary parking is available in the UCI Student Center Parking Structure, at 311 W. Peltason Drive.

About the UCI Anti-Cancer Challenge: A community movement and annual ride, run and walk, the Anti-Cancer Challenge raises awareness of and funds for innovative cancer research at UCI’s Chao Family Comprehensive Cancer Center. In the event’s short history, participants have raised enough money to enable the pursuit of more than two dozen original research approaches to prevent, diagnose or treat cancer. For more information, visit Anti-CancerChallenge.org. 
About UCI Health: Patients can access UCI Health – the clinical enterprise of the University of California, Irvine – at primary and specialty care offices across Orange County and at its main campus, UCI Medical Center in Orange, California. The 417-bed acute care hospital provides tertiary and quaternary care, ambulatory and specialty medical clinics, and behavioral health and rehabilitation services. UCI Medical Center features Orange County’s only National Cancer Institute-designated comprehensive cancer center, high-risk perinatal/neonatal program, and American College of Surgeons-verified Level I adult and Level II pediatric trauma center and regional burn center. UCI Health serves a region of nearly 4 million people in Orange County, western Riverside County and southeast Los Angeles County. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter.
About the University of California, Irvine: Founded in 1965, UCI is the youngest member of the prestigious Association of American Universities. The campus has produced three Nobel laureates and is known for its academic achievement, premier research, innovation and anteater mascot. Led by Chancellor Howard Gillman, UCI has more than 36,000 students and offers 222 degree programs. It’s located in one of the world’s safest and most economically vibrant communities and is Orange County’s second-largest employer, contributing $5 billion annually to the local economy. For more on UCI, visit www.uci.edu. </article>
