<heading> UCI Health leader resigns executive roles, will retain faculty position </heading>
<sub_heading> N/A </sub_heading>
<date> February 6, 2018 </date>
<article> Irvine, Calif., Feb. 6, 2018 — The University of California, Irvine today announced the resignation of Howard Federoff, M.D., Ph.D., as vice chancellor for health affairs and CEO of the UCI Health System. He will retain his faculty position and continue his neurobiological research on the UCI campus.
“Howard is a brilliant physician and scientist,” said UCI Chancellor Howard Gillman. “We are grateful for his three years of leadership as we expanded and reshaped our health enterprise for ongoing success.”
As part of this transition, the roles of chief executive and vice chancellor will become two positions. The CEO of UCI Health will oversee all clinical, patient-serving operations, including the hospital, medical group, and research and specialty centers. The vice chancellor for health affairs will oversee the academic and research missions of the various schools and programs within the Susan and Henry Samueli College of Health Sciences.
Searches for these two positions will open immediately, with interim leadership in place during the recruitment process. Richard Gannotta, currently chief operating officer for UCI Health, was named interim CEO. Alan Goldin, M.D., Ph.D., currently associate vice chancellor for academic affairs, was named interim vice chancellor for health affairs.
During his tenure, Federoff was instrumental in helping UCI secure a transformational naming gift from Susan and Henry Samueli for the College of Health Sciences. The $200 million donation became one of the largest in public university history and set the stage for significant expansion, including the build-out of UCI’s health campus in Irvine.
Susan and Henry Samueli expressed their gratitude for Federoff’s leadership and counsel, adding: “We are excited at the opportunity to welcome the next great leader of the Samueli College of Health Sciences, who will be joining an amazing group of health professionals dedicated to forging an innovative national model for advancing health and well-being.”
About the University of California, Irvine: Founded in 1965, UCI is the youngest member of the prestigious Association of American Universities. The campus has produced three Nobel laureates and is known for its academic achievement, premier research, innovation and anteater mascot. Led by Chancellor Howard Gillman, UCI has more than 30,000 students and offers 192 degree programs. It’s located in one of the world’s safest and most economically vibrant communities and is Orange County’s second-largest employer, contributing $5 billion annually to the local economy. For more on UCI, visit www.uci.edu.
Media access: Radio programs/stations may, for a fee, use an on-campus ISDN line to interview UCI faculty and experts, subject to availability and university approval. For more UCI news, visit news.uci.edu. Additional resources for journalists may be found at communications.uci.edu/for-journalists.
  </article>
