<heading> UCI Medical Center among America’s Best Hospitals for 20 consecutive years </heading>
<sub_heading> Programs in geriatrics, urology, nephrology and gynecology nationally ranked </sub_heading>
<date> July 28, 2020 </date>
<article> Orange, Calif., July 28, 2020 — For the 20th consecutive year, U.S. News & World Report has recognized UCI Medical Center as one of America’s Best Hospitals. The annual rankings recognize hospitals that excel in treating the most challenging patients and conditions. This year, the report highlights the excellence of UCI Health programs in gynecology, No. 16; urology, No. 24; nephrology, No. 43; and geriatrics, No. 45 among similar programs nationally. The medical center is ranked No. 5 in the Los Angeles metropolitan region.
“This 20th consecutive recognition as one of America’s Best Hospitals is a testament to the excellence of our physicians, nurses, therapists and support staff and reflects the best of academic medicine,” said Chad T. Lefteris, CEO, UCI Health System. “UCI Health is Orange County’s indispensable health care resource and plays a critical, unduplicated role in improving the health and wellbeing of our region.”
In addition to nationally ranked departments, UCI Health programs in cancer, GI & GI surgery, neurology & neurosurgery, orthopedics, pulmonology & lung surgery are rated as high performing.
“Advancing individual and community health through discovery, innovation and a commitment to clinical excellence is the hallmark of everything UCI Health does,” said Michael J. Stamos, MD, dean, UCI School of Medicine. “These programs excel at not only providing leading acute care for complex health challenges, but they are also uniquely qualified to provide the diagnostic and preventative care that has become so necessary during the Covid-19 pandemic.”
Over the past 20 years, UCI Medical Center is the only Orange County hospital consistently rated among America’s best by U.S. News. The annual Best Hospitals rankings and ratings, now in their 31st year, are designed to assist patients and their doctors in making informed decisions about where to receive care for challenging health conditions or for common elective procedures.
Clinicians and researcher in the UCI Health top 50 programs are nationally recognized leaders in their fields and reflect the dedication to excellence patients have come to expect from UCI Health.

The UCI Health Department of Gynecology’s faculty excel in all areas of gynecologic care, from providing general gynecologic to specialty care. Experts in female pelvic medicine and reconstructive surgery program have helped thousands of women suffering with urinary, fecal incontinence and pelvic organ prolapse. The department’s gynecologic oncologists provide unmatched clinical care in Southern California and have led national efforts to advance the standards of care for gynecologic cancers, including ovarian and cervical cancer.


The UCI Health program in Nephrology, Hypertension & Kidney Transplantation provides advanced, comprehensive and compassionate care for patients with all types of kidney and hypertension-related disorders. The program is Orange County’s leading provider of life-sustaining kidney transplants and treatment for chronic kidney disease and its experts regularly publish research that advances the standard of care for patients facing kidney disease and end stage renal failure.


The UCI Health program in Geriatric Medicine and Gerontology has long been an advocate for improving senior health. The UCI Health SeniorHealth Center provides unmatched access to healthcare for older adults and was among the country’s first patient-centered medical homes focusing on geriatric care and Centers of Excellence in Elder Abuse.


The Department of Urology excels at patient care, education and research, and features national leaders in kidney and prostate cancer, minimally invasive surgery and men’s health. Our faculty includes experts who have pioneered noninvasive and minimally invasive techniques to treat kidney stones and kidney cancer. Urologic oncologists are renowned for their pioneering expertise in robot-assisted, minimally invasive surgery for prostate, kidney and bladder cancers.

UCI Health also achieved the highest rating possible in five common adult procedures and conditions identified by U.S. News:

Abdominal aortic aneurysm repair
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
Colon cancer surgery
Heart failure
Lung cancer surgery

For the 2020-21 rankings and ratings, U.S. News evaluated more than 4,500 medical centers nationwide in 25 specialties, procedures and conditions. In the 16 specialty areas, 165 hospitals were ranked in at least one specialty. In rankings by state and metro area, U.S. News recognized hospitals as high performing across multiple areas of care.
The U.S. News Best Hospitals methodologies in most areas of care are based largely on objective measures such as risk-adjusted survival and discharge-to-home rates, volume, and quality of nursing, among other care-related indicators.
For more information about the 2020-21 rankings and ratings, please visit the FAQ. The rankings will be published in the U.S. News “Best Hospitals 2020” guidebook, available for pre-order now from the U.S. News Online Store.
For more information, visit Best Hospitals and use #BestHospitals on Facebook and Twitter.
UCI Health is the clinical enterprise of the University of California, Irvine. Patients can access UCI Health at primary and specialty care offices across Orange County and at its main campus, UCI Medical Center in Orange, California. The 418-bed acute care hospital, listed among America’s Best Hospitals by U.S. News & World Report for the 20th consecutive year, provides tertiary and quaternary care, ambulatory and specialty medical clinics, and behavioral health and rehabilitation services. UCI Medical Center is home to Orange County’s only National Cancer Institute-designated comprehensive cancer center, high-risk perinatal/neonatal program and American College of Surgeons-verified Level I adult and Level II pediatric trauma center and regional burn center. UCI Health serves a region of nearly 4 million people in Orange County, western Riverside County and southeast Los Angeles County. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter.
About the University of California, Irvine: Founded in 1965, UCI is the youngest member of the prestigious Association of American Universities. The campus has produced three Nobel laureates and is known for its academic achievement, premier research, innovation and anteater mascot. Led by Chancellor Howard Gillman, UCI has more than 30,000 students and offers 192 degree programs. It’s located in one of the world’s safest and most economically vibrant communities and is Orange County’s second-largest employer, contributing $5 billion annually to the local economy. For more on UCI, visit www.uci.edu </article>
