<heading> Ten new trustees appointed to UCI Foundation board </heading>
<sub_heading> Experienced leaders will guide campus efforts to raise, manage private funds </sub_heading>
<date> November 27, 2017 </date>
<link> https://news.uci.edu/2017/11/27/ten-new-trustees-appointed-to-uci-foundation-board/ </link>
<article> Irvine, Calif., Nov. 27, 2017 — The University of California, Irvine has announced the appointment of 10 new trustees to the UCI Foundation board of directors who have experience, leadership and expertise in higher education, law, business and philanthropy.
The mission of the UCI Foundation is to raise and manage private funds supporting UCI’s mission of excellence in teaching, research and public service.
“It is with great pleasure that I welcome our new trustees to the UCI Foundation board,” said Chair Julie Hill. “Each one of these individuals is an exceptional leader in our community and dedicated to helping UCI realize its bright future. Their energy, engagement and excitement is evident, and we welcome them into our foundation family.”
Trustee appointments are for three years, with the possibility of renewal. The new board members are:

Carol J. Choi ’85 – Founder of United Exchange Corp. and a philanthropist and entrepreneur
Eugene W. Choi ’86, MBA ’01 – President and CEO of United Exchange Corp.
Kate Duchene – President and CEO of Resources Global Professionals
Kristen S. Monson ’82, MBA ’86 – Retired executive vice president of Pacific Investment Management Co.
Sheila K. Peterson – Community leader, chair of the advisory board for the Susan Samueli Integrative Health Institute at UCI and member of the Dean’s Arts Council for the Claire Trevor School of the Arts
Susan Samueli – Co-founder of the Samueli Foundation, co-founder of the Samueli Academy, co-owner of the Anaheim Ducks and UCI Medal recipient in 2000
Kathleen R. Santora – Community leader and former president and current board member of the Foothill-De Anza Community College District Foundation
Mark K. Santora – Chairman of the board of Panzura, a hybrid cloud storage company based in Silicon Valley
Sheila Prell Sonenshine – Former California Superior Court judge and Court of Appeal justice, attorney and businesswoman
Joseph A. Walker – Vice chairman of investment banking at J.P. Morgan

Two ex officio (nonvoting) trustees, who will serve two-year terms, were also appointed. They are:

Philip K. Anthony, Ph.D. (representing the School of Medicine) – CEO of DecisionQuest, a trial consulting and strategic communications firm
Sandra J. Jackson (representing the School of Education) – Co-founder of the Samueli Academy

The UCI Foundation now has 53 voting board members, including the 10 new trustees. Their role is to advise university leadership in all areas related to public trust, investments and philanthropy; mobilize existing and potential supporters to help grow UCI’s endowment; and engage with appropriate stakeholders to advance fundraising efforts aligned with the university’s strategic plan.
The foundation also aims to build stronger networks of support around deans, directors and health leaders to further UCI’s contributions to the region; interact with schools, units and departments in strategic advisory and advocacy roles; and facilitate regional and global partnerships that expand UCI’s capacity to improve lives.
About the University of California, Irvine: Founded in 1965, UCI is the youngest member of the prestigious Association of American Universities. The campus has produced three Nobel laureates and is known for its academic achievement, premier research, innovation and anteater mascot. Led by Chancellor Howard Gillman, UCI has more than 30,000 students and offers 192 degree programs. It’s located in one of the world’s safest and most economically vibrant communities and is Orange County’s second-largest employer, contributing $5 billion annually to the local economy. For more on UCI, visit www.uci.edu.
Media access: Radio programs/stations may, for a fee, use an on-campus ISDN line to interview UCI faculty and experts, subject to availability and university approval. For more UCI news, visit news.uci.edu. Additional resources for journalists may be found at communications.uci.edu/for-journalists. </article>
