<heading> Tom Andriola is named UCI vice chancellor of information technology and data </heading>
<sub_heading> New role to employ technology and data to mobilize knowledge and drive innovation </sub_heading>
<date> September 11, 2019 </date>
<link> https://news.uci.edu/2019/09/11/tom-andriola-is-named-uci-vice-chancellor-of-information-technology-and-data/ </link>
<article> Irvine, Calif., Sept. 11, 2019 — Tom Andriola, an experienced business and technology leader in the education and healthcare sectors, has been named vice chancellor of information technology and data at the University of California, Irvine, effective Oct. 1.
Andriola takes on a newly created position within the UCI leadership structure and will oversee the entirety of the university’s IT function, including at UCI Health. He’ll work closely with campus and healthcare leaders to explore opportunities for technology and data to drive innovation and enhance the missions of teaching, research, patient care and public service.
“I am delighted that Tom Andriola is joining our team as our inaugural vice chancellor of information technology and data,” said Chancellor Howard Gillman. “He brings to this key role a national reputation for innovation in information systems and a distinguished record of IT leadership in both education and business.”
Andriola comes to UCI from the UC Office of the President, where he serves as the vice president & chief information officer for the UC system and the chief information officer for UC Health. In his six years in this role, he has worked across the campuses and medical centers to expand the use of technology strategically and realize operational synergies.
Among his accomplishments, he created an organizational and technology platform to support the collaboration of 8,000 IT professionals across the UC’s campuses and medical centers, launched the IT Leadership Academy to develop the future technology leaders, and developed UC Health’s big data strategy, which led to the creation of the UC-wide clinical data warehouse with 16 million patients represented for the purposes of improving patient care and supporting research.
“Technology’s role is becoming more and more strategic to the mission of the university,” Andriola said. “Whether we are talking about creating an outstanding experience for our students through the technology they have in their hand, supporting researchers needing to aggregate and compute petabytes of data for their research, fusing digital health records to advance breakthroughs, capturing human genomic profile or doing data science – technology is playing a key enabling role. I feel honored to join the UCI team to explore and realize this brilliant future.”
UCI created the vice chancellor position to lead strategic advancement and integration of information technology and data at UCI for all research, education, patient care, and administrative and business operations. The role will partner broadly across the campus, research and health system to enhance capabilities and support the strategic plan developed in 2016.
Innovative business and technology leader
Andriola brings more than 25 years of experience as a global business and technology executive, including roles as a business transformation leader for a multi-billion-dollar enterprise, a global CIO with staff around the world and being employee #1 for a new business.
He brings a wealth of management and leadership experience, having lived abroad and run organizations on four continents. Throughout his career, he has been a champion of change as well as a leader for innovation in the marketplace, having brought first-of-kind solutions to market and led the creation of several new businesses. 
Andriola is active in higher education and healthcare associations, and he serves on several boards. He is board chair for the Corporation for Education Network Initiatives in California, a board director for OCHIN, and a board director for Risk and Safety Solutions.
With his experiences in technology and innovation, Andriola maintains relationships with UC San Diego’s California Institute for Telecommunications & Information Technology, UC San Francisco’s Center for Digital Health Innovation and UC Davis’ Innovation Institute for Food and Health. He is a sought-after speaker on a variety of technology topics in healthcare, higher education and the changing role of the CIO.
Andriola holds a bachelor’s degree from George Washington University and a master’s degree from the University of South Florida, and he has completed the Stanford Executive MBA program.
About the University of California, Irvine: Founded in 1965, UCI is the youngest member of the prestigious Association of American Universities. The campus has produced three Nobel laureates and is known for its academic achievement, premier research, innovation and anteater mascot. Led by Chancellor Howard Gillman, UCI has more than 36,000 students and offers 222 degree programs. It’s located in one of the world’s safest and most economically vibrant communities and is Orange County’s second-largest employer, contributing $5 billion annually to the local economy. For more on UCI, visit www.uci.edu.
Media access: Radio programs/stations may, for a fee, use an on-campus ISDN line to interview UCI faculty and experts, subject to availability and university approval. For more UCI news, visit news.uci.edu. Additional resources for journalists may be found at communications.uci.edu/for-journalists. </article>
