<heading> UCI launches comprehensive COVID-19 resource site </heading>
<sub_heading> oc-covid19.org to engage community with informative, helpful content </sub_heading>
<date> April 22, 2020 </date>
<link> https://news.uci.edu/2020/04/22/uci-launches-comprehensive-covid-19-resource-site/ </link>
<article> Irvine, Calif., April 22, 2020 — To provide helpful advice and informative stories about life during the COVID-19 pandemic, the University of California, Irvine has launched a comprehensive news site – oc-covid19.org – to serve Orange County and regional communities.
The site’s editorial content is designed to engage viewers with useful and novel information derived from UCI’s world-class academic and healthcare research and practices, ranging from stories about the latest medical and research breakthroughs to expert-based articles on how to cope and thrive during this time of social distancing.
UCI and UCI Heath are uniquely positioned to provide timely information about this crisis. Their scholars, scientists and caregivers are working tirelessly to find solutions to the myriad health, technology, lifestyle, economic, political and cultural issues linked to the world’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic. UCI is one of the top 10 public universities in the U.S., and it’s home to the only academic medical system in Orange County.
“There is appropriate concern and uncertainty about COVID-19, particularly how we should act today and what our lives will be like in the future. As a premier public institution, UCI is committed to sharing accurate information about the disease and its impact,” said Dr. Steve Goldstein, vice chancellor of health affairs. “Our aspiration is for this new site to be a valued resource that informs, engages and reassures Orange County residents and those they love.”
About oc-covid19.org
UCI and UCI Health are at the forefront of Orange County’s response to the novel coronavirus pandemic, and oc-covid19.org provides the public access to the remarkable innovation and research around COVID-19 taking place across the university, as well as the contributions the UCI community is making toward a global solution. At oc-covid19.org, you’ll find the latest information on COVID-19 testing, clinical trials, policy, technology, education and social issues, along with insights and analyses on the real-life implications of these developments.
Content includes:

Expert voices – Front-line and research stories from across the enterprise, including contributions from units across campus.
Community updates – A rundown of top national, state and regional news related to COVID-19. Examples of recent items include information from the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the Department of Homeland Security, the California Department of Public Health and the Los Angeles Angels.
Podcasts – UCI Podcast episodes related to the coronavirus. Topics range from public health tips to managing the operations of a hospital during this time.
Wellness – Health contributed stories on managing stress, exercise, sleep and other factors affecting everyday life.
Lifestyle – Contributions include parenting and healthy habit stories, as well as recipes from our very own chef at the Anteater Recreation Center kitchen.
For parents – Advice and resources for parents and at-home learning.
Latest headlines – UCI and UCI Health experts weighing in on topics related to COVID-19 in major publications.
FAQs – Basic coronavirus questions, with links to respectable resources for more detailed information.
Tips & facts – Downloadable infographic guides in English and Spanish.
O.C. case counts and testing figures – Links to the Orange County Health Care Agency data page.
Making a difference – Links to UCI’s three major funds supporting COVID-19, as well as community organizations (Second Harvest Food Bank, Orange County United Way and Project Hope Alliance).
Related links – Links to UCI- and UCI Health-specific COVID-19 resources and community links, including the World Health Organization, the California Department of Public Health, the Orange County Health Care Agency and help lines.

About the University of California, Irvine: Founded in 1965, UCI is the youngest member of the prestigious Association of American Universities. The campus has produced three Nobel laureates and is known for its academic achievement, premier research, innovation and anteater mascot. Led by Chancellor Howard Gillman, UCI has more than 36,000 students and offers 222 degree programs. It’s located in one of the world’s safest and most economically vibrant communities and is Orange County’s second-largest employer, contributing $5 billion annually to the local economy. For more on UCI, visit www.uci.edu. 
About UCI Health: UCI Health comprises the clinical enterprise of the University of California, Irvine. Patients can access UCI Health at primary and specialty care offices across Orange County and at its main campus, UCI Medical Center, in Orange, California. The 418-bed acute care hospital provides tertiary and quaternary care, ambulatory and specialty medical clinics, and behavioral health and rehabilitation services. UCI Medical Center features Orange County’s only National Cancer Institute-designated comprehensive cancer center, high-risk perinatal/neonatal program, and American College of Surgeons-verified Level I adult and Level II pediatric trauma center and regional burn center. It is the primary teaching hospital for the UCI School of Medicine. UCI Health serves a region of nearly 4 million people in Orange County, western Riverside County and southeast Los Angeles County. Follow UCI Health on Facebook and Twitter.
Media access: Radio programs/stations may, for a fee, use an on-campus ISDN line to interview UCI faculty and experts, subject to availability and university approval. For more UCI news, visit news.uci.edu. Additional resources for journalists may be found at communications.uci.edu/for-journalists. </article>
