<heading> UCI Health-Newport Beach center offers science-based integrative health </heading>
<sub_heading> New clinic to provide cutting-edge approach to comprehensive care </sub_heading>
<date> August 18, 2020 </date>
<link> https://news.uci.edu/2020/08/18/uci-health-newport-beach-center-offers-science-based-integrative-health/ </link>
<article> Irvine, Calif., Aug. 18, 2020 — UCI Health is pleased to announce the opening of its latest Newport Beach location, which is dedicated to preventing disease and managing health by considering all aspects of a patient’s mind, body and spirit. UCI Health-Newport Beach is the first to offer a comprehensive model of science-based medicine combined with a philosophy of care that makes use of all therapies and disciplines to achieve optimal health and healing.
“At UCI Health, we make a daily commitment to stop at nothing to meet and exceed the expectations of every member of our community,” said Chad T. Lefteris, CEO of UCI Health. “Our multidisciplinary clinical care teams provide world-class primary and specialty care driven by the discovery and innovation of Orange County’s only university health system.”
“UCI Health is built to advance knowledge that improves patient health and wellness,” Lefteris said.
Advances in medicine are made every day. Community-based health providers treat patients within the standards of care, while academic health systems like UCI Health conduct the research that improves these standards. For example, UCI Health integrative health faculty physicians publish research into the effect of diet, mood and stress on specific conditions that they then translate into cutting-edge patient care.
UCI Health-Newport Beach is located at 2161 San Joaquin Hills Road, Newport Beach, on the corner of San Joaquin Hills Road and Avocado Avenue.
“We take a balanced approach to wellness,” said Shaista Malik, MD, PhD, associate vice chancellor for integrative health at the Susan and Henry Samueli College of Health Sciences. “Integrative health means that when we care for you, we take into account every aspect of your life — your health history, lifestyle, stressors and other factors — to restore your well-being and quality of life.”
This whole-person approach allows UCI Health caregivers to understand each patient’s unique circumstances and determine the most appropriate treatments and therapies, Malik said.
“Our providers work together to develop treatment plans that adapt to your specific needs, to help you live a healthy and balanced life,” she added.
Services available at UCI Health-Newport Beach include:

Integrative Cardiology
Integrative Dermatology
Integrative Gastroenterology
Integrative Pain Management
Massage Therapy
Mindfulness
Naturopathic Medicine
Nutrition
Plastic Surgery
Sports Medicine
Traditional Acupuncture
Yoga

For more information or to make an appointment, visit ucihealth.org/newportbeach or call 949-386-5700.
UCI Health comprises the clinical enterprise of the University of California, Irvine. Patients can access UCI Health at primary and specialty care offices across Orange County and at its main campus, UCI Medical Center in Orange, California. The 418-bed acute care hospital provides tertiary and quaternary care, ambulatory and specialty medical clinics, and behavioral health and rehabilitation services. U.S. News & World Report has recognized UCI Medical Center among America’s Best Hospitals for 20 consecutive years. The enterprise is home to Orange County’s only National Cancer Institute-designated comprehensive cancer center, high-risk perinatal/neonatal program and American College of Surgeons-verified Level I adult and Level II pediatric trauma center and regional burn center. It is the primary teaching hospital for the UCI School of Medicine. UCI Health serves a region of nearly 4 million people in Orange County, western Riverside County and southeast Los Angeles County. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter.
About the University of California, Irvine: Founded in 1965, UCI is the youngest member of the prestigious Association of American Universities. The campus has produced three Nobel laureates and is known for its academic achievement, premier research, innovation and anteater mascot. Led by Chancellor Howard Gillman, UCI has more than 30,000 students and offers 192 degree programs. It’s located in one of the world’s safest and most economically vibrant communities and is Orange County’s second-largest employer, contributing $5 billion annually to the local economy. For more on UCI, visit www.uci.edu. </article>
