<heading> UCI’s third annual Anti-Cancer Challenge sets fundraising record </heading>
<sub_heading> Event proceeds will expand research on prevention, diagnosis and treatment </sub_heading>
<date> July 2, 2019 </date>
<link> https://news.uci.edu/2019/07/02/ucis-third-annual-anti-cancer-challenge-sets-fundraising-record/ </link>
<article> Irvine, Calif., July 2, 2019 — At least 18 promising cancer studies and early-phase clinical trials will move forward at the University of California, Irvine’s Chao Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, thanks to supporters of the third annual UCI Anti-Cancer Challenge, which raised a record $620,000 for cancer research.
More than 185 teams and 2,800 individuals contributed to fundraising through participation in 14-, 35-, 60- and 100-mile bicycle rides and 5K and 10K run/walks on Challenge Day, Saturday, June 8, in the campus’s Aldrich Park.
“We are grateful to the Orange County community for embracing the Anti-Cancer Challenge with more enthusiasm every year,” said Dr. Richard Van Etten, director of the Chao Family Comprehensive Cancer Center. “Each additional study or early-phase clinical trial that people help to fund will reveal something new about cancer, improving our ability to diagnose, prevent or treat these devastating diseases. This insight has the potential to make life better for the people who trust UCI Health with their cancer care and, at the same time, move science in the direction of a world that is cancer-free.”
While participants completed rides, runs and walks, their friends and families enjoyed the Anti-Cancer Challenge festival in the park, which featured live music; special appearances by Anaheim Ducks mascot Wild Wing and UCI mascot Peter the Anteater; and activities for kids. Many took advantage of complimentary screenings for skin cancer and pediatric vision issues.
“It was gratifying to see more than 3,000 people enjoying the festival this year,” said Jennifer Sarrail, executive director of the Anti-Cancer Challenge. “So much of what the community experiences on Challenge Day is made possible by our many sponsors and donors. We appreciate all those who joined with us to make this a special day and look forward to partnering with even more companies and individuals to make the 2020 event bigger and better.”
Anti-Cancer Challenge sponsors included Monarch Beach Resort, LA Fitness, Hensel Phelps, the Kay Family Foundation, G Companies, the Anaheim Ducks and Honda Center, Dunkin’, Hathaway Dinwiddie, Montessori Schools of Irvine, tk1sc, DPR Construction, Pacific Ventures Management, Metagenics, Kitchell, FPL and Associates, Medline Industries, Laboratory for Advanced Medicine, Precision Diagnostics, SmithGroup, Pan-Pacific Mechanical, Miller Environmental, Melissa’s Produce, Hologic and B. Braun Medical.
For information on how to sponsor or volunteer at the 2020 Anti-Cancer Challenge, email Anti-CancerChallenge@uci.edu or call 714-456-7171.
About the Anti-Cancer Challenge: The Anti-Cancer Challenge is a community movement that unites people through rallies, training events and other activities to raise awareness and funds to defeat cancer. All money raised by participants goes directly to cancer research. To date, Anti-Cancer Challenge grants have supported more than two dozen original research approaches to preventing, diagnosing or treating cancer. For more information, visit Anti-CancerChallenge.org.
About the Chao Family Comprehensive Cancer Center: UCI’s Chao Family Comprehensive Cancer Center is at the forefront of discovering new ways to fight cancer. As the only National Cancer Institute-designated comprehensive cancer center in Orange County, it combines leading-edge research, pioneering clinical trials and world-class patient care. In 2018 alone, more than 5,600 new patients benefited from the center’s advanced treatment.
About UCI Health: Patients can access UCI Health – the clinical enterprise of the University of California, Irvine – at primary and specialty care offices across Orange County and at its main campus, UCI Medical Center in Orange, California. The 417-bed acute care hospital provides tertiary and quaternary care, ambulatory and specialty medical clinics, and behavioral health and rehabilitation services. UCI Medical Center features Orange County’s only National Cancer Institute-designated comprehensive cancer center, high-risk perinatal/neonatal program, and American College of Surgeons-verified Level I adult and Level II pediatric trauma center and regional burn center. UCI Health serves a region of nearly 4 million people in Orange County, western Riverside County and southeast Los Angeles County. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter.
About the University of California, Irvine: Founded in 1965, UCI is the youngest member of the prestigious Association of American Universities. The campus has produced three Nobel laureates and is known for its academic achievement, premier research, innovation and anteater mascot. Led by Chancellor Howard Gillman, UCI has more than 36,000 students and offers 222 degree programs. It’s located in one of the world’s safest and most economically vibrant communities and is Orange County’s second-largest employer, contributing $5 billion annually to the local economy. For more on UCI, visit www.uci.edu. </article>
